<p>CSCI 77800: Ethics and Computer Science</p>
<p>Professor Mike Zamansky</>
<p>Marina Moshchenko</p>
<h1>Optimization algorithm – unintended consequences</h1>
https://www.brookings.edu/research/enrollment-algorithms-are-contributing-to-the-crises-of-higher-education/ 
College Enrollment Management Process
College admissions and financial aid offices have critical financial goal is accepting and yielding enough students to keep the college financially solvent. Enormous pressure on financial aid offices to yield enough students to cover institutional expenses without giving out too much scholarship funding. This is where enrollment management algorithms help colleges vary the cost of attendance to students’ willingness to pay. There are two major steps in these algorithms.
STEP 1. Predicting likelihood to enroll.
The predictive step of algorithmic enrollment is aimed at estimating how likely an accepted applicant is to enroll in a specific college. Input data: college’s historical admissions data (variables: college’s past applicants high school GPA, test results, FAFSA data, financial aid received, demographics information), engagement metrics (how often applicants attend college recruitment events, what percentage of college emails they read) to predict whether each of the accepted applicants chose to enroll. This is an application of supervised machine learning. The resulting model is a complex set of associations between these input variables and whether past applicants enrolled in the college. This model from can be used to predict the likelihood of enrollment for future applicants—their likelihood of yield. 
STEP 2. Optimizing for financial, demographic, and scholastic outcomes.
This step involves strategy for engaging with applicants that will lead to the best enrollment outcomes as defined by that college. Two categories: (1) by-hand optimization and (2) algorithmic optimization. “By-hand” entails that individuals (as opposed to an algorithm) choose a scholarship strategy. The consultants and financial aid office work together, exploring various disbursement strategies and breaking down the resulting predictions. This approach can be time-consuming. Optimization algorithms are an emerging alternative to manually creating and comparing scholarship disbursement strategies. Default setting is to minimize scholarship aid while maintaining enrollment. Using optimization algorithms requires four inputs: a dataset of new college applicants, the predictive model from the prior step, a list of constraints set by the college, and a single value to optimize (yield, in our case). To start, it generates thousands of strategies for how to disperse scholarship funding across all applicants, subject to the college-set constraints. Then, within each option, the optimization algorithm uses the predictive algorithm to see how likely each applicant is to attend, given the scholarship they would hypothetically be offered. 

THE POTENTIAL HARMS OF ENROLLMENT MANAGEMENT ALGORITHMS
1. These algorithms may be driving up the number of applicants attending college at the edge of their financial capacity.
2. These algorithms typically optimize scholarships for yielding students, rather than using scholarships to support student graduation and success.
3. Possibility of algorithmic bias, through which subgroups of applicants who appear to the algorithm to be less affected by changes in scholarship funding may be mistreated. 
